---
layout: page
title: Moby Dick and the Horror of Whiteness

# optional
description: A reading from Melville’s masterpiece on the culture and psychology of the colour white
---
07 Jul 2025
{:.post-date}

[Last time](/2025/06/30/fifty-shades-of-blue-grey.html), the language of botany led me into the history of attempts to standardise colour vocabulary, culminating in the science of colour geometry. This put me in mind of one my favourite passages from one of my favourite novels, which I read in a YouTube video included at the bottom of this post. It’s a chapter from _Moby Dick_ which discusses the awful significance of the whale being white.

<!--more-->

I’m sure we’ve all experienced occasions when we’ve realised that we’ve misunderstood something for a long time — perhaps we’ve used a word incorrectly for many years, or we’ve unfairly judged a book by its cover until, one day, we give it a chance and find out that our impressions were mistaken. This happened with me and _Moby Dick_, though not because I judged it by its cover — I rather judged it by its appearance in the film adaptation of Roald Dahl’s _Matilda_.

At the end of the film, Matilda takes _Moby Dick_ off the shelf for a bedtime story, finally getting her way after her father had earlier ripped up a copy of the book, thinking from its title that it was pornographic. Seeing the film as a 6 or 7 year old, _Moby Dick_ didn’t mean anything to me but I took the scene to mean that _Moby Dick_ must be a children’s book — having my own favoured children’s books already, I didn’t seek it out and when I grew up, I didn’t think of it again.

That was until I studied English at university and the idea of the Great American novel got me wondering whether I’d been mistaken about what kind of writer Herman Melville was. I eventually read _Moby Dick_ in my mid-20s and was stunned to find something utterly unsuitable for children, it being an absolutely lunatic, experimental work of genius.

One of the things I love about it, which is particularly well demonstrated by the chapter I read here, is its unrelenting, insanity-infused obsessiveness. Melville will pick up an apparently simple theme — in this case, the fact of the whale being white, which another author might consider in a sentence or two — and will pursue its cultural import and psychological force with maniacal intensity. Ishmael’s voice is made so vivid by this impassioned madness that I really wish I could listen to him rather than just read his words.

{% include youtube.html video_id="pwLugzKpZ_k" %}